--- 
title: "Pulmonary vascular remodeling in isolated mouse lungs: effects on pulsatile pressure-flow relationships." 
collection: publications 
permalink: /publication/2006-06-06-vanderpool-70 
excerpt: '<b>Abstract: </b>Chronic hypoxia causes pulmonary vasoconstriction and pulmonary hypertension, which lead to pulmonary vascular remodeling and right ventricular hypertrophy. To determine the effects of hypoxia-induced pulmonary vascular remodeling on pulmonary vascular impedance, which is the right ventricular afterload, we exposed C57BL6 mice to 0 (control), 10 [...]' 
date: 2006-06-06 
venue: 'Journal of biomechanics' 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/S0021-9290(06)00122-9' 
citation:  ' Tuchscherer HA, Vanderpool RR, Chesler NC. <i>Pulmonary vascular remodeling in isolated mouse lungs: effects on pulsatile pressure-flow relationships.</i> J Biomech. 2007;40(5):993-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2006.03.023. Epub 2006 Jun 6.' 
--- 
<b>Abstract</b>:  Chronic hypoxia causes pulmonary vasoconstriction and pulmonary hypertension, which lead to pulmonary vascular remodeling and right ventricular hypertrophy. To determine the effects of hypoxia-induced pulmonary vascular remodeling on pulmonary vascular impedance, which is the right ventricular afterload, we exposed C57BL6 mice to 0 (control), 10 and 15 days of hypobaric hypoxia (n=6, each) and measured pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and impedance ex vivo. Chronic hypoxia led to increased pulmonary artery pressures for flow rates between 1 and 5ml/min (P<0.01), and increased PVR, 0-Hz pulmonary vascular impedance and the index of wave reflection (P<0.05) as well as a more negative impedance phase angle for low frequencies (P<0.05). The increases in resistance and 0-Hz impedance correlated with increased muscularization of small arterioles measured with quantitative immunohistochemistry (P<0.01). The increases in wave reflection and decreases in phase angle are likely due to increased proximal artery stiffness. These results confirm that chronic hypoxia causes significant changes in steady and pulsatile pressure-flow relationships in mouse lungs and does so via structural remodeling. They also provide important baseline data for experiments with genetically engineered mice, with which molecular mechanisms of pulmonary vascular remodeling can be investigated.  
 
[Paper Link](https://doi.org/S0021-9290(06)00122-9) 
 
<b>Recommended citation</b>:  Tuchscherer HA, Vanderpool RR, Chesler NC. <i>Pulmonary vascular remodeling in isolated mouse lungs: effects on pulsatile pressure-flow relationships.</i> J Biomech. 2007;40(5):993-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2006.03.023. Epub 2006 Jun 6. 
