--- 
title: "Characterization of the isolated, ventilated, and instrumented mouse lung perfused with pulsatile flow." 
collection: publications 
permalink: /publication/2011-04-29-vanderpool-65 
excerpt: '<b>Abstract: </b>The isolated, ventilated and instrumented mouse lung preparation allows steady and pulsatile pulmonary vascular pressure-flow relationships to be measured with independent control over pulmonary arterial flow rate, flow rate waveform, airway pressure and left atrial pressure. Pulmonary vascular resistance is calculated based on multi-point [...]' 
date: 2011-04-29 
venue: 'Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE' 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.3791/2690' 
citation:  ' Vanderpool RR, Chesler NC. <i>Characterization of the isolated, ventilated, and instrumented mouse lung perfused with pulsatile flow.</i> J Vis Exp. 2011 Apr 29;(50). pii: 2690. doi: 10.3791/2690.' 
--- 
<b>Abstract</b>:  The isolated, ventilated and instrumented mouse lung preparation allows steady and pulsatile pulmonary vascular pressure-flow relationships to be measured with independent control over pulmonary arterial flow rate, flow rate waveform, airway pressure and left atrial pressure. Pulmonary vascular resistance is calculated based on multi-point, steady pressure- flow curves; pulmonary vascular impedance is calculated from pulsatile pressure-flow curves obtained at a range of frequencies. As now recognized clinically, impedance is a superior measure of right ventricular afterload than resistance because it includes the effects of vascular compliance, which are not negligible, especially in the pulmonary circulation. Three important metrics of impedance--the zero hertz impedance Z(0;), the characteristic impedance Z(C;), and the index of wave reflection R(W;)--provide insight into distal arterial cross- sectional area available for flow, proximal arterial stiffness and the upstream-downstream impedance mismatch, respectively. All results obtained in isolated, ventilated and perfused lungs are independent of sympathetic nervous system tone, volume status and the effects of anesthesia. We have used this technique to quantify the impact of pulmonary emboli and chronic hypoxia on resistance and impedance, and to differentiate between sites of action (i.e., proximal vs. distal) of vasoactive agents and disease using the pressure dependency of Z(C;). Furthermore, when these techniques are used with the lungs of genetically engineered strains of mice, the effects of molecular-level defects on pulmonary vascular structure and function can be determined.  
 
[Paper Link](https://doi.org/10.3791/2690) 
 
<b>Recommended citation</b>:  Vanderpool RR, Chesler NC. <i>Characterization of the isolated, ventilated, and instrumented mouse lung perfused with pulsatile flow.</i> J Vis Exp. 2011 Apr 29;(50). pii: 2690. doi: 10.3791/2690. 
