--- 
title: "Prognostic relevance of pulmonary arterial compliance in patients with chronic heart failure." 
collection: publications 
permalink: /publication/2013-12-21-vanderpool-54 
excerpt: '<b>Abstract: </b>BACKGROUND: Reduced pulmonary arterial compliance (Ca) is a marker of poor prognosis in idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension. We tested the hypothesis that pulmonary arterial Ca could be a predictor of outcome in patients with chronic heart failure (CHF). METHODS: We enrolled 306 patients with CHF due [...]' 
date: 2013-12-21 
venue: 'Chest' 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/S0012-3692(15)34599-2' 
citation:  ' Pellegrini P, Rossi A, Pasotti M, Raineri C, Cicoira M, Bonapace S, Dini FL, Temporelli PL, Vassanelli C, Vanderpool R, Naeije R, Ghio S. <i>Prognostic relevance of pulmonary arterial compliance in patients with chronic heart failure.</i> Chest. 2014 May;145(5):1064-1070. doi: 10.1378/chest.13-1510.' 
--- 
<b>Abstract</b>:  BACKGROUND: Reduced pulmonary arterial compliance (Ca) is a marker of poor prognosis in idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension. We tested the hypothesis that pulmonary arterial Ca could be a predictor of outcome in patients with chronic heart failure (CHF). METHODS: We enrolled 306 patients with CHF due to systolic left ventricular dysfunction (sLVD) who underwent a clinically driven right-sided heart catheterization. Pulmonary arterial Ca was measured by the ratio between stroke volume and pulse pressure (SV/PP). The primary end point was cardiovascular death; secondary end point was the composite of cardiovascular death, urgent heart transplantation, and appropriately detected and treated episode of ventricular fibrillation. RESULTS: An inverse relationship was observed between SV/PP and pulmonary vascular resistance, the mean resistance- compliance product (RC-time) being 0.30 +/- 0.2 s. In patients with pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) &lt; 15 mm Hg, the mean RC-time was 0.34 +/- 0.14 s, and in patients with PCWP >/= 15 mm Hg it was 0.28 +/- 0.22 s. Eighty-seven patients died in a follow-up period of 50 +/- 32 months. At receiver operating characteristic curve analysis, the optimal prognostic cutoff point of SV/PP was 2.15 mL/mm Hg. An elevated (&gt; 2.15) SV/PP was more strongly associated with survival than any other hemodynamic variable; it was associated with poor prognosis both in patients with high (P = .003) and in patients with normal pulmonary vascular resistance (P = .005). CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary arterial Ca is a strong prognostic indicator in patients with CHF with sLVD. Most importantly, its prognostic role is retained in patients with normal pulmonary vascular resistance.  
 
[Paper Link](https://doi.org/S0012-3692(15)34599-2) 
 
<b>Recommended citation</b>:  Pellegrini P, Rossi A, Pasotti M, Raineri C, Cicoira M, Bonapace S, Dini FL, Temporelli PL, Vassanelli C, Vanderpool R, Naeije R, Ghio S. <i>Prognostic relevance of pulmonary arterial compliance in patients with chronic heart failure.</i> Chest. 2014 May;145(5):1064-1070. doi: 10.1378/chest.13-1510. 
