--- 
title: "Dobutamine stress echocardiography for the assessment of pressure-flow relationships of the pulmonary circulation." 
collection: publications 
permalink: /publication/2014-03-15-vanderpool-53 
excerpt: '<b>Abstract: </b>BACKGROUND: Stress testing of the pulmonary circulation (via increasing pulmonary blood flow) can reveal abnormal mean pulmonary artery pressure- cardiac output (mPpa-Q) responses, which may facilitate early diagnosis of pulmonary vascular disease. We investigated the application of dobutamine stress echocardiography (DSE) for the noninvasive assessment [...]' 
date: 2014-03-15 
venue: 'Chest' 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/S0012-3692(15)33178-0' 
citation:  ' Lau EMT, Vanderpool RR, Choudhary P, Simmons LR, Corte TJ, Argiento P, D'Alto M, Naeije R, Celermajer DS. <i>Dobutamine stress echocardiography for the assessment of pressure-flow relationships of the pulmonary circulation.</i> Chest. 2014 Oct;146(4):959-966. doi: 10.1378/chest.13-2300.' 
--- 
<b>Abstract</b>:  BACKGROUND: Stress testing of the pulmonary circulation (via increasing pulmonary blood flow) can reveal abnormal mean pulmonary artery pressure- cardiac output (mPpa-Q) responses, which may facilitate early diagnosis of pulmonary vascular disease. We investigated the application of dobutamine stress echocardiography (DSE) for the noninvasive assessment of mPpa-Q relationships. METHODS: DSE using an incremental dose protocol (</= 20 mug/kg/min) was performed in 38 subjects (16 patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension [PAH] and 22 healthy control subjects). An additional 22 healthy control subjects underwent exercise stress echocardiography as a comparator group. Multipoint mPpa-Q plots were analyzed, and the pulmonary vascular distensibility coefficient alpha was calculated. RESULTS: DSE was feasible and informative in 93% of subjects. The average dobutamine-induced mPpa-Q slope was 1.1 +/- 0.7 mm Hg/L/min in healthy control subjects and 5.1 +/- 2.5 mm Hg/L/min in patients with PAH (P < .001). The dobutamine-induced alpha was markedly reduced in patients with PAH (0.003 +/- 0.001 mm Hg vs 0.02 +/- 0.01 mm Hg in control subjects, P < .001). When exercise and dobutamine stress were compared in healthy control subjects, the exercise-induced mPpa-Q slope was modestly higher (1.6 +/- 0.7 mm Hg/L/min, P = .03 vs dobutamine). In patients with PAH, lower functional class status was associated with lower dobutamine-induced mPpa-Q slopes (P = .014), but not with resting total pulmonary vascular resistance. CONCLUSIONS: Noninvasive assessment of mPpa-Q relationships is feasible with dobutamine stress. DSE may potentially be a useful noninvasive technique for stress testing of the pulmonary vasculature.  
 
[Paper Link](https://doi.org/S0012-3692(15)33178-0) 
 
<b>Recommended citation</b>:  Lau EMT, Vanderpool RR, Choudhary P, Simmons LR, Corte TJ, Argiento P, D'Alto M, Naeije R, Celermajer DS. <i>Dobutamine stress echocardiography for the assessment of pressure-flow relationships of the pulmonary circulation.</i> Chest. 2014 Oct;146(4):959-966. doi: 10.1378/chest.13-2300. 
