--- 
title: "TSP1-CD47 signaling is upregulated in clinical pulmonary hypertension and contributes to pulmonary arterial vasculopathy and dysfunction." 
collection: publications 
permalink: /publication/2016-10-13-vanderpool-38 
excerpt: 'AIMS: Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) is a ligand for CD47 and TSP1(-/-) mice are protected from pulmonary hypertension (PH). We hypothesized the TSP1-CD47 axis is upregulated in human PH and promotes pulmonary arterial vasculopathy. METHODS AND RESULTS: We analyzed the molecular signature and functional response of [...]' 
date: 2016-10-13 
venue: 'Cardiovascular research' 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvw218' 
citation:  ' Rogers NM, Sharifi-Sanjani M, Yao M, Ghimire K, Bienes-Martinez R, Mutchler SM, Knupp HE, Baust J, Novelli EM, Ross M, St Croix C, Kutten JC, Czajka CA, Sembrat JC, Rojas M, Labrousse-Arias D, Bachman TN, Vanderpool RR, Zuckerbraun BS, Champion HC, Mora AL, Straub AC, Bilonick RA, Calzada MJ, Isenberg JS. <i>TSP1-CD47 signaling is upregulated in clinical pulmonary hypertension and contributes to pulmonary arterial vasculopathy and dysfunction.</i> Cardiovasc Res. 2017 Jan;113(1):15-29. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvw218. Epub 2016 Oct 13.' 
--- 
Abstract:  AIMS: Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) is a ligand for CD47 and TSP1(-/-) mice are protected from pulmonary hypertension (PH). We hypothesized the TSP1-CD47 axis is upregulated in human PH and promotes pulmonary arterial vasculopathy. METHODS AND RESULTS: We analyzed the molecular signature and functional response of lung tissue and distal pulmonary arteries (PAs) from individuals with (n = 23) and without (n = 16) PH. Compared with controls, lungs and distal PAs from PH patients showed induction of TSP1-CD47 and endothelin-1/endothelin A receptor (ET-1/ETA) protein and mRNA. In control PAs, treatment with exogenous TSP1 inhibited vasodilation and potentiated vasoconstriction to ET-1. Treatment of diseased PAs from PH patients with a CD47 blocking antibody improved sensitivity to vasodilators. Hypoxic wild type (WT) mice developed PH and displayed upregulation of pulmonary TSP1, CD47, and ET-1/ETA concurrent with down regulation of the transcription factor cell homolog of the v-myc oncogene (cMyc). In contrast, PH was attenuated in hypoxic CD47(-/-) mice while pulmonary TSP1 and ET-1/ETA were unchanged and cMyc was overexpressed. In CD47(-/-) pulmonary endothelial cells cMyc was increased and ET-1 decreased. In CD47(+/+ )cells, forced induction of cMyc suppressed ET-1 transcript, whereas suppression of cMyc increased ET-1 signaling. Furthermore, disrupting TSP1-CD47 signaling in pulmonary smooth muscle cells abrogated ET-1-stimulated hypertrophy. Finally, a CD47 antibody given 2 weeks after monocrotaline challenge in rats upregulated pulmonary cMyc and improved aberrations in PH-associated cardiopulmonary parameters. CONCLUSIONS: In pre-clinical models of PH CD47 targets cMyc to increase ET-1 signaling. In clinical PH TSP1-CD47 is upregulated, and in both, contributes to pulmonary arterial vasculopathy and dysfunction.  
 
[Paper Link](https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvw218) 
 
Recommended citation:  Rogers NM, Sharifi-Sanjani M, Yao M, Ghimire K, Bienes-Martinez R, Mutchler SM, Knupp HE, Baust J, Novelli EM, Ross M, St Croix C, Kutten JC, Czajka CA, Sembrat JC, Rojas M, Labrousse-Arias D, Bachman TN, Vanderpool RR, Zuckerbraun BS, Champion HC, Mora AL, Straub AC, Bilonick RA, Calzada MJ, Isenberg JS. <i>TSP1-CD47 signaling is upregulated in clinical pulmonary hypertension and contributes to pulmonary arterial vasculopathy and dysfunction.</i> Cardiovasc Res. 2017 Jan;113(1):15-29. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvw218. Epub 2016 Oct 13. 
