--- 
title: "Validation of the Tricuspid Annular Plane Systolic Excursion/Systolic Pulmonary Artery Pressure Ratio for the Assessment of Right Ventricular- Arterial Coupling in Severe Pulmonary Hypertension." 
collection: publications 
permalink: /publication/2019-09-10-vanderpool-16 
excerpt: 'BACKGROUND: The ratios of tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE)/echocardiographically measured systolic pulmonary artery pressure (PASP), fractional area change/invasively measured mean pulmonary artery pressure, right ventricular (RV) area change/end-systolic area, TAPSE/pulmonary artery acceleration time, and stroke volume/end-systolic area have [...]' 
date: 2019-09-10 
venue: 'Circulation. Cardiovascular imaging' 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.119.009047' 
citation:  ' Tello K, Wan J, Dalmer A, Vanderpool R, Ghofrani HA, Naeije R, Roller F, Mohajerani E, Seeger W, Herberg U, Sommer N, Gall H, Richter MJ. <i>Validation of the Tricuspid Annular Plane Systolic Excursion/Systolic Pulmonary Artery Pressure Ratio for the Assessment of Right Ventricular- Arterial Coupling in Severe Pulmonary Hypertension.</i> Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019 Sep;12(9):e009047. doi: 10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.119.009047. Epub 2019 Sep 10.' 
--- 
Abstract:  BACKGROUND: The ratios of tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE)/echocardiographically measured systolic pulmonary artery pressure (PASP), fractional area change/invasively measured mean pulmonary artery pressure, right ventricular (RV) area change/end-systolic area, TAPSE/pulmonary artery acceleration time, and stroke volume/end-systolic area have been proposed as surrogates of RV-arterial coupling. The relationship of these surrogates with the gold standard measure of RV- arterial coupling (invasive pressure-volume loop-derived end- systolic/arterial elastance [Ees/Ea] ratio) and RV diastolic stiffness (end-diastolic elastance) in pulmonary hypertension remains incompletely understood. We evaluated the relationship of these surrogates with invasive pressure-volume loop-derived Ees/Ea and end-diastolic elastance in pulmonary hypertension. METHODS: We performed right heart echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging 1 day before invasive measurement of pulmonary hemodynamics and single-beat RV pressure-volume loops in 52 patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension or chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension. The relationships of the proposed surrogates with Ees/Ea and end-diastolic elastance were evaluated by Spearman correlation, multivariate logistic regression, and receiver operating characteristic analyses. Associations with prognosis were evaluated by Kaplan-Meier analysis. RESULTS: TAPSE/PASP, fractional area change/mean pulmonary artery pressure, RV area change/end-systolic area, and stroke volume/end-systolic area but not TAPSE/pulmonary artery acceleration time were correlated with Ees/Ea and end-diastolic elastance. Of the surrogates, only TAPSE/PASP emerged as an independent predictor of Ees/Ea (multivariate odds ratio: 18.6; 95% CI, 0.8-96.1; P=0.08). In receiver operating characteristic analysis, a TAPSE/PASP cutoff of 0.31 mm/mm Hg (sensitivity: 87.5% and specificity: 75.9%) discriminated RV-arterial uncoupling (Ees/Ea <0.805). Patients with TAPSE/PASP <0.31 mm/mm Hg had a significantly worse prognosis than those with higher TAPSE/PASP. CONCLUSIONS: Echocardiographically determined TAPSE/PASP is a straightforward noninvasive measure of RV-arterial coupling and is affected by RV diastolic stiffness in severe pulmonary hypertension. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT03403868.  
 
[Paper Link](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.119.009047) 
 
Recommended citation:  Tello K, Wan J, Dalmer A, Vanderpool R, Ghofrani HA, Naeije R, Roller F, Mohajerani E, Seeger W, Herberg U, Sommer N, Gall H, Richter MJ. <i>Validation of the Tricuspid Annular Plane Systolic Excursion/Systolic Pulmonary Artery Pressure Ratio for the Assessment of Right Ventricular- Arterial Coupling in Severe Pulmonary Hypertension.</i> Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019 Sep;12(9):e009047. doi: 10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.119.009047. Epub 2019 Sep 10. 
