--- 
title: "Right ventricular function correlates of right atrial strain in pulmonary hypertension: a combined cardiac magnetic resonance and conductance catheter study." 
collection: publications 
permalink: /publication/2019-11-22-vanderpool-11 
excerpt: '<b>Abstract: </b>The functional relevance of right atrial (RA) function in pulmonary hypertension (PH) remains incompletely understood. The purpose of this study was to explore the correlation of cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) feature tracking-derived RA phasic function with invasively measured pressure-volume (P-V) loop-derived right [...]' 
date: 2019-11-22 
venue: 'American journal of physiology. Heart and circulatory physiology' 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00485.2019' 
citation:  ' Tello K, Dalmer A, Vanderpool R, Ghofrani HA, Naeije R, Roller F, Seeger W, Wiegand M, Gall H, Richter MJ. <i>Right ventricular function correlates of right atrial strain in pulmonary hypertension: a combined cardiac magnetic resonance and conductance catheter study.</i> Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2020 Jan 1;318(1):H156-H164. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00485.2019. Epub 2019 Nov 22.' 
--- 
Abstract:  The functional relevance of right atrial (RA) function in pulmonary hypertension (PH) remains incompletely understood. The purpose of this study was to explore the correlation of cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) feature tracking-derived RA phasic function with invasively measured pressure-volume (P-V) loop-derived right ventricular (RV) end-diastolic elastance (Eed) and RV-arterial coupling [ratio of end-systolic elastance to arterial elastance (Ees/Ea)]. In 54 patients with severe PH, CMR was performed within 24 h of diagnostic right heart catheterization and P-V measurements. RA phasic function was assessed by CMR imaging of RA reservoir, passive, and active strain. The association of RA phasic function with indexes of RV function was evaluated by Spearman's rank correlation and linear regression analyses. Median [interquartile range] RA reservoir strain, passive strain, and active strain were 19.5% [11.0-24.5], 7.0% [4.0-12.0], and 13.0% [7.0-18.5], respectively. Ees/Ea was 0.73 [0.48-1.08], and Eed was 0.14 mmHg/mL [0.05-0.22]. RV diastolic impairment [RV end-diastolic pressure (EDP) and Eed] was correlated with RA phasic function, but Ea and Ees were not. In addition, RA phasic function was correlated with inferior vena cava diameter. In multivariate linear regression analysis, adjusting for key P-V loop indexes, Eed and EDP remained significantly associated with RA phasic function. We conclude that RA phasic function is altered in relation to impaired diastolic function of the chronically overloaded right ventricle and contributes to backward venous flow and systemic congestion. These results call for more attention to RA function in the management of patients with PH.NEW & NOTEWORTHY There is growing awareness of the importance of the right atrial (RA)-right ventricular (RV) axis in pulmonary hypertension (PH). Our results uncover alterations in RA phasic function that are related to depressed RV lusitropic function and contribute to backward venous return and systemic congestion in chronic RV overload. Assessment of RA function should be part of the management and follow-up of patients with PH.  
 
[Paper Link](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00485.2019) 
 
<b>Recommended citation</b>:  Tello K, Dalmer A, Vanderpool R, Ghofrani HA, Naeije R, Roller F, Seeger W, Wiegand M, Gall H, Richter MJ. <i>Right ventricular function correlates of right atrial strain in pulmonary hypertension: a combined cardiac magnetic resonance and conductance catheter study.</i> Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2020 Jan 1;318(1):H156-H164. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00485.2019. Epub 2019 Nov 22. 
