--- 
title: "Comprehensive Diagnostic Evaluation of Cardiovascular Physiology in Patients With Pulmonary Vascular Disease: Insights From the PVDOMICS Program." 
collection: publications 
permalink: /publication/2020-02-24-vanderpool-7 
excerpt: '<b>Abstract: </b>BACKGROUND: Invasive hemodynamic evaluation through right heart catheterization plays an essential role in the diagnosis, categorization, and risk stratification of patients with pulmonary hypertension. METHODS: Subjects enrolled in the PVDOMICS (Redefining Pulmonary Hypertension through Pulmonary Vascular Disease Phenomics) program undergo an extensive invasive hemodynamic evaluation that [...]' 
date: 2020-02-24 
venue: 'Circulation. Heart failure' 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.119.006363' 
citation:  ' Tang WHW, Wilcox JD, Jacob MS, Rosenzweig EB, Borlaug BA, Frantz RP, Hassoun PM, Hemnes AR, Hill NS, Horn EM, Singh HS, Systrom DM, Tedford RJ, Vanderpool RR, Waxman AB, Xiao L, Leopold JA, Rischard FP. <i>Comprehensive Diagnostic Evaluation of Cardiovascular Physiology in Patients With Pulmonary Vascular Disease: Insights From the PVDOMICS Program.</i> Circ Heart Fail. 2020 Mar;13(3):e006363. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.119.006363. Epub 2020 Feb 24.' 
--- 
Abstract:  BACKGROUND: Invasive hemodynamic evaluation through right heart catheterization plays an essential role in the diagnosis, categorization, and risk stratification of patients with pulmonary hypertension. METHODS: Subjects enrolled in the PVDOMICS (Redefining Pulmonary Hypertension through Pulmonary Vascular Disease Phenomics) program undergo an extensive invasive hemodynamic evaluation that includes repeated measurements at rest and during several provocative physiological challenges. It is a National Institutes of Health/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute initiative to reclassify pulmonary hypertension groups based on clustered phenotypic and phenomic characteristics. At a subset of centers, participants also undergo an invasive cardiopulmonary exercise test to assess changes in hemodynamics and gas exchange during exercise. CONCLUSIONS: When coupled with other physiological testing and blood -omic analyses involved in the PVDOMICS study, the comprehensive right heart catheterization protocol described here holds promise to clarify the diagnosis and clustering of pulmonary hypertension patients into cohorts beyond the traditional 5 World Symposium on Pulmonary Hypertension groups. This article will describe the methods applied for invasive hemodynamic characterization in the PVDOMICS program. Registration: URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT02980887.  
 
[Paper Link](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.119.006363) 
 
<b>Recommended citation</b>:  Tang WHW, Wilcox JD, Jacob MS, Rosenzweig EB, Borlaug BA, Frantz RP, Hassoun PM, Hemnes AR, Hill NS, Horn EM, Singh HS, Systrom DM, Tedford RJ, Vanderpool RR, Waxman AB, Xiao L, Leopold JA, Rischard FP. <i>Comprehensive Diagnostic Evaluation of Cardiovascular Physiology in Patients With Pulmonary Vascular Disease: Insights From the PVDOMICS Program.</i> Circ Heart Fail. 2020 Mar;13(3):e006363. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.119.006363. Epub 2020 Feb 24. 
