--- 
title: "Direct eNAMPT Involvement in Pulmonary Hypertension and Vascular Remodeling: Transcriptional Regulation by SOX and HIF2alpha." 
collection: publications 
permalink: /publication/2020-03-06-vanderpool-6 
excerpt: '<b>Abstract: </b>RATIONALE: We previously demonstrated involvement of nicotinamide phosphoribosyl-transferase (NAMPT) in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) and now examine NAMPT regulation and extracellular NAMPT's role in PAH vascular remodeling. METHODS: NAMPT transcription and protein expression in human lung endothelial cell (EC) was assessed in response to [...]' 
date: 2020-03-06 
venue: 'American journal of respiratory cell and molecular biology' 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2019-0164OC' 
citation:  ' Sun X, Sun BL, Babicheva A, Vanderpool R, Oita RC, Casanova N, Tang H, Gupta A, Lynn H, Gupta G, Rischard F, Sammani S, Kempf CL, Moreno-Vinasco L, Ahmed M, Camp SM, Wang J, Desai AA, Yuan JX, Garcia JGN. <i>Direct eNAMPT Involvement in Pulmonary Hypertension and Vascular Remodeling: Transcriptional Regulation by SOX and HIF2alpha.</i> Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2020 Mar 6. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2019-0164OC.' 
--- 
<b>Abstract</b>:  RATIONALE: We previously demonstrated involvement of nicotinamide phosphoribosyl-transferase (NAMPT) in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) and now examine NAMPT regulation and extracellular NAMPT's role in PAH vascular remodeling. METHODS: NAMPT transcription and protein expression in human lung endothelial cell (EC) was assessed in response to PAH-relevant stimuli (PDGF, VEGF, TGFbeta1 and hypoxia). Endothelial to mesenchymal transition (EndMT) was detected by SANI1 and PECAM1 immunofluorescence. An eNAMPT-neutralizing polyclonal antibody (pAb) was tested in a PAH model of monocrotaline (MCT) challenge in rats. RESULTS: Plasma eNAMPT levels, significantly increased in IPAH patients, were highly correlated with indices of PAH severity. Extracelluar NAMPT increased EndMT and each PAH stimulus significantly increased EC NAMPT promoter activity involving transcription factors STAT5, SOX18, and SOX 17, a newly GWAS-defined PAH candidate gene. The hypoxia-induced transcription factor, HIF-2alpha, also potently regulated NAMPT promoter activity and HIF-2alpha binding sites were identified between -628bp and -328bp. The prolyl hydroxylase domain-containing protein 2 (PHD2) inhibitor (FG-4592) significantly increased NAMPT promoter activity and protein expression in a HIF-2alpha-dependent manner. Finally, the eNAMPT- neutralizing pAb significantly reduced MCT-induced vascular remodeling, PAH hemodynamic alterations and NFkB activation. CONCLUSIONS: eNAMPT is a novel and attractive therapeutic target essential to PAH vascular remodeling.  
 
[Paper Link](https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2019-0164OC) 
 
<b>Recommended citation</b>:  Sun X, Sun BL, Babicheva A, Vanderpool R, Oita RC, Casanova N, Tang H, Gupta A, Lynn H, Gupta G, Rischard F, Sammani S, Kempf CL, Moreno-Vinasco L, Ahmed M, Camp SM, Wang J, Desai AA, Yuan JX, Garcia JGN. <i>Direct eNAMPT Involvement in Pulmonary Hypertension and Vascular Remodeling: Transcriptional Regulation by SOX and HIF2alpha.</i> Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2020 Mar 6. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2019-0164OC. 
